Persona ID: pa05
Source slug: professional_agent

===== SOURCE: Professional-agent/VOA Customer Insight Agent subset for AI personas.pdf =====
OF APPEALS ARE
REPRESENTED
ALL DATA BASED ON 2010 RATING LIST
SUCCESSFUL APPEALS
UNREPRESENTED
APPEALS IN ALL
SECTORS HAVE
INCREASED FROM
APPEALS ARE LESS SUCCESSFUL
REPRESENTED AND
IS MOSTLY EQUAL IN
ALL SECTORS
APPEALS COME
FROM LONDON
VOA WILL
DEFEND
SEEMINGLY INDEFENSIBLE.
THERE IS DEFENDING RV AND
LACK
COMMON SENSE
STATEMENT OF CASES
MASS PRODUCED
WITH
LITTLE THOUGHT
. THEY
DON'T RESPOND TO THE
ISSUES YOU HAVE
IDENTIFIED.
MOST OF THE
GOOD PEOPLE
HAVE
LEFT
WITH THEM
THEIR
SKILLS
KNOWLEDGE
. THERE ARE
ONLY A FEW GOOD PEOPLE
THAT REMAIN.
SYSTEM
OVERLOADED
THIS
CREATES
EXTRA
STRESS
OUR CLIENTS.
DELAYS
CAUSE
SOME OF
CLIENTS
BUSINESS
WE FEEL A LOT OF
PAIN WORKING TO
THE VOA'S CURRENT
WAYS. WE ALSO CAN
REFERENCERS, CASEWORKERS, VALUERS
THE MIDDLE.
WISH THINGS ARE
THE WAY THEY
USED TO BE.
CONSTRUCTIVE
HEALTHY
DISCUSSIONS
EXPERTS TO COME TO
AMICABLE
AGREEMENTS
WITHOUT HAVING TO
VOA's SoC can contain evidence that we're not
aware of and can change the path of the
appeal.
¥ It takes time to collect evidence for a SoC.
¥ Getting evidence comes down to personal
contacts.
Sometimes the margin is too small and the
effort to go to appeal means it isn't financially
worth it.
¥ If a reduction is over 5% then the VOA won't
sign it off without going to tribunal.
¥ The VOA cherry picks the information they
want to share.
¥ The VOA do everything they can to keep the RV
as high as they can.
¥ If we don't know the basis of the VOA case how
can we negotiate?
¥ Even on simple cases you have to appeal with
all the effort that goes with that.
The VOA say they are fair but they are not. They
used to be.
¥ Having our cases passed around internally in
the VOA is a huge frustration and causes
issues as case knowledge is lost.
¥ Our clients get very frustrated with the
process.
¥ The VOA are far more process driven than they
used to be. They no longer think sensibly.
¥ The VOA are under resourced.
¥ Some in the VOA take delight in hiding behind
regulations.
¥ The VOA make simple cases difficult. They put
things in for appeal when it is clear the rates
are wrong.
¥ The VOA has a culture of fear. Staff are not
empowered and they are scared of giving
discounts.
¥ Even when we are in agreement it can take far
too long for this to be actioned.
¥ The VOA will under value to protect against
appeals.
¥ Some cases take time to be allocated. We have
no idea who to deal with while this is going on.
¥ There is a huge backlog of cases and we think
that in certain instances the VOA are
purposefully not listing things. This has been
exacerbated by the edict from George Osborne
to fix the backlog. The VOA is too focused on
hitting this target reduction.
¥ The VOA data should really include GPS
coordinates, as it can sometimes be hard to
locate a property exactly
¥ The way that the VOA website captures
addresses doesn't always reflect how
addresses are structured. This can make it
harder to find properties in the system.
¥ Feel that valuers are reluctant to make
professional judgements and would prefer the
VT decided for them.
¥ Proposals will often get made invalid for no
good reason. It can be very hard to work out
why and make the necessary corrections or
challenge the reasoning. Maybe this is a
delaying tactic?
¥ Feel that the properties they represent
contribute a much more significant proportion
of RV than those of smaller organisations. If all
cases are treated equally, they end up with a
poor service that feels unwarranted.
¥ There is a concern that valuers can act
unprofessionally. Either by:
¥ Under-valuing properties to protect
against future reductions so an
increase can be threatened if the
ratepayer appeals
¥ Adding the wrong things to valuations to
protect against reductions.
¥ Hiding line items of a valuation within
¥ Feel that people are under pressure not
to lose too much value out of the list
rather than to achieve the correct
valuation.
¥ The VOA treats every case as the same and
won't prioritise the more complex ones.
PROCESS
STATEMENT OF CASE
It is very hard to get hold of a case worker. It is
just as hard to get a reply. It can feel like case
workers are hiding from you.
¥ The lack of communication puts pressure on
everyone.
¥ When you make your appeal you cannot give
your client any idea on the date it will be
heard.
¥ We often have to escalate to get a result. This
takes a lot of hard work and time.
¥ The VOA call centre system is frustrating."I
want to talk to the case worker that wrote to
me but I can't be put through and have to wait
for a call back from someone to tell me they
can't help me and to arrange for the person I
called for to call me."
¥ Direct dials are rarely given out.
¥ We are not told when our case workers go on
holiday. When they go away work on our cases
stops.
¥ Too much information is forgotten about or
lost.
¥ It is hard to get hold of anyone after 4pm.
¥ We give no information in proposals because
we don't have to. When we have provided the
information the VOA aren't interested anyway.
It's getting harder to have a productive
discussion to reach an agreement. VOA staff
are reluctant to talk to us.
¥ Feel that you have to put in an appeal to get
anyone at the VOA to speak to you. This has
made things much more adversarial.
¥ The VOA are reluctant to engage beyond the
target date. Simply respond, "we await your
case".
¥ Even if we have the correct contact details,
phones ring out and email inboxes bounce our
emails.
It costs a lot of money to go to tribunal £100k.
¥ The VT panel are not property specialists and
can not always see compelling evidence for
what it is. Therefore there are a lot of wrong
decisions made.
¥ When a case gets a tribunal date it comes out of
the blue and it is all systems go. This is
demanding on us and sometimes our clients.
Some cases take years to get to VT.
¥ Sometimes the VOA send people who know
nothing about the case to tribunal.
Valuation Tribunals have targets on listings, not
on resolutions. This colours how things work.
¥ Volume agents ride on the back of our work.
Once we get a win they exploit it in the area via
their marketing team.
¥ Worry that the blanket appeals type of agents
have put the VOA under such pressure that
they've gone into a defensive mode. Also
concerned that they've yet to develop a strategy
to combat them.
¥ There is a concern that the VOA now think that
all agents are crooks.
COMMUNICATION
VALUATION
TRIBUNAL
VOLUME AGENTS
¥ Feel that the knowledge base of the VOA is in
decline.
Younger VOA staff are not well skilled and
don't know what they are talking about.
Feel that the VOA workforce is becoming less
skilled. This can make first contact more
difficult.
¥ The local knowledge has gone. VOA staff used
to know a property and its rating history. This
made discussions much more productive. Now
a case may go to Tribunal as a consequence
when agreement could have been reached, or
go around the loop until someone with the
right expertise is assigned to the case.
¥ We don't have access to the rental information
the VOA has used to decide their valuation.
This makes it hard to understand if the RV is
correct.
AGENT
ROLE:
TYPE:
NAME:
PROFESSIONAL
STEPHEN JONES
PROFILE
¥ Professional agents vary in size from lone
operators to large multi-office firms. Their size
influences their client mix.
¥ All professional agents will work with a mix of
large corporate clients and SMEs. The larger
agents will tend to have a greater number of larger
clients. The smaller agents are likely to have a
smaller number of large clients and a large
number of SMEs. The large clients are the more
profitable in all cases.
¥ The larger the agent, the more cases they will have
active. Even smaller agents can have more than
100 cases active at any time.
¥ Some cases are not profitable, which is a particular
problem for the smaller agents.
¥ Not all cases go to appeal, but the number is
increasing.
¥ Professional agents draw their business from a
variety of sources:
¥ Repeat business, an area they value very
much.
¥ Direct contact, often owing to referral or
reputation.
¥ Sales activity.
¥ Different agents will offer different fee structures:
¥ The majority of work is on a no-win
no-fee basis. It is reported that this is
preferred by corporates.
¥ Smaller agents may charge upfront
fees in some instances.
¥ The larger agents may even act on a
consultancy basis for clients and
charge fees accordingly.
¥ The larger agents in particular feel that they have a
better property database than the VOA. The smaller
agents are less able to compile something too
extensive, but will be knowledgeable about the area
in which they operate.
¥ Regardless of size, they all report spending a lot of
time trying to move things forward.
PROFESSIONAL AGENTS ARE THE MOST COMMON TYPE OF AGENT. THEY WILL ALWAYS BE PROFESSIONALLY QUALIFIED
AND ACT AS TRUSTED ADVISORS TO THEIR CLIENTS. THEY ARE A BROAD GROUP AND WITHIN THAT THERE IS A LOT OF
A SINGLE LOCATION. THEY ARE LIKELY TO HAVE A MIX OF LARGE AND SMALL CLIENTS, LARGE CLIENTS WILL BE FEW IN
NUMBER BUT MAKE UP MUCH OF THEIR WORK, SMALL CLIENTS WILL BE HIGH IN NUMBER BUT PROVIDE LESS WORK AND
REVENUE.
MANY OF THESE AGENTS ARE VERY EXPERIENCED AND HAVE DEALT WITH THE VOA FOR MANY YEARS. THE CHANGES THE
VOA HAVE GONE THROUGH HAS IMPACTED THE PROFESSIONAL AGENT AS MUCH AS VOA STAFF. PROFESSIONAL AGENTS
PREFERRED THE OLD WAY OF WORKING WITH THE VOA, WHERE COLLABORATION AND NEGOTIATION WITH
PROFESSIONALLY QUALIFIED PEOPLE WAS THE WAY TO SOLVE A CASE.
TO CONTACT ALL SIMILAR BUSINESSES IN THE AREA. VOLUME AGENTS ARE ALSO LIKELY TO PROMISE DISCOUNTS THAT
ARE NOT ACHIEVABLE AND POACH WORK FROM THE PROFESSIONAL AGENT - ALTHOUGH MANY OF THESE CASES END
WITH A UNSATISFIED CLIENT.
GOING TO VALUATION
TRIBUNAL IS THE FAILURE
OF TWO PROFESSIONAL
PEOPLE - IT SHOULD BE
AGREEABLE
VOA INTERACTIONS
¥ The changes the VOA has gone through has made
their job harder.
¥ It can be hard to speak to anyone at the VOA
about a case. They used to be able to pick up
the phone and speak to someone.
¥ It's much more difficult to negotiate a
reduction. The VOA aren't as flexible as they
used to be and much more likely to say no.
¥ Most cases are settled before the Valuation
Tribunal. Ideally they would like to solve cases
during the discussion phase.
¥ They favour phone contact, resorting to email if
they can't get an answer or if they need to send
things to the VOA. They will try to make contact as
soon as they know who the caseworker is.
¥ They feel that if they do get to talk to or meet the
Valuation Officer they can normally reach
agreement.
¥ They have a mixed view of VOA staff. Most VOA
people are felt to be nice, but as with any large
organisation, some less so.
¥ Sometimes they get pointless call backs where the
operator can't help but then refers them to
someone else.
¥ For specialist properties they tend to be dealing
with the same people, in the same way as
integrated agents do.
¥ They note that VOA people seem depressed and
down-trodden. Given their closeness to the VOA
they also hear about people having to have time off
for stress.
¥ They notice that caseworkers are overworked. So
they do understand why communication is
challenging or infrequent. This doesn't reduce the
frustration it causes though. Referencers seem to
be under less pressure and can help to push things
through.
¥ They know which caseworkers are open to
negotiation and which are not. They will hope to
have their case assigned to the former. A lot seems
to fall to the caseworker, who is typically a lower
grade and less empowered to help.
¥ Owing to a selective approach to which cases they
appeal, they feel that they are often successful at
court.
¥ If the VOA are making a site visit they will try to be
there too. Although they estimate that 75% of the
time the VOA do not inspect. This can put them at a
disadvantage.
¥ The VOA do a lot of work at their desk and agents
are worried that they're getting out of touch with
the market.
¥ As with all agents, they keep a database of
contacts at the VOA.
¥ They report a trend that if the VOA do engage, it's
mostly via email.
¥ There is a feeling that the way in which they used
to work with the VOA was a case of professionals
working together. It feels like this has gone now.
CLIENT INTERACTIONS
¥ They work closely with their clients, spending time
face to face and keeping them updated on
progress.
¥ They are honest with their clients, only appealing if
they think they can win.
¥ Some potential clients need a lot of convincing,
even when they have a clear case.
¥ They feel that they rarely get the full refund for
their cases.
¥ Large businesses will always use agents, but they
keep very little information on their real-estate.
¥ Their clients see them as trusted advisors. They
expect a professional service.
¥ Their clients tell them how much they dislike the
way the Volume Agents operate.
¥ They operate a tiered system of fees depending on
the size of the Rateable Value.
¥ There are a number of triggers for their client to
engage them:
¥ Receiving a Form Of Return
¥ Building works nearby
¥ Building work on their property
¥ Splits or mergers
¥ A lack of understanding of the rating system.
NEEDS AND WANTS
¥ The VOA should provide the evidence used to
inform a valuation when an appeal is lodged.
¥ The VOA need to compromise and take on board
valid evidence.
¥ To be able to agree cases faster.
¥ Timely responses to emails.
¥ Feedback and progress updates on appeals.
¥ Decreases and negotiation before reaching the
Valuation Tribunal.
¥ The VOA need to be more accessible and
communicate.
¥ The VOA need to be more open, like they used to
¥ Face to face negotiations with the VOA would be
great.
¥ The VOA should be independent and allowed to be
independent.
¥ To be notified when a caseworker is on leave.
¥ The switchboard should be able to put them
through to who they want to talk to.
WE'LL ONLY GO TO COURT
IF WE KNOW WE'RE GOING
LONE OPERATORS:
Are a single chartered surveyor. Some will work from a small office, others from
home. Despite their size they share many of the attributes of larger practices.
Our research did not provide an opportunity to talk to lone operators. However,
given what we know, we believe they are likely to face these specific challenges:
¥ Speed of VOA processes, as this will have a very serious impact on their
cash-flow, which unlike larger agents, they will struggle to absorb.
¥ Predatory agents. Lacking any marketing function or client management,
they will struggle to combat a well-resourced volume agent.
¥ Lack of access to VOA data. It may be that they can't afford the tools or
databases that larger agents can access and so will be much more reliant
on the VOA website and the information the VOA shares with them.
SMALL PRACTICES:
Employing in the region of 10 surveyors, small practices are more robust than
lone operators, but still experience many of the same concerns. Their client
base is slightly broader, but still mostly composed of SMEs. They may have a
small number of larger clients, predominately based in the region in which they
operate. It is possible that they will specialise in certain sectors, such as retail.
They are very much a business that serves their local area and will have strong
local knowledge.
Specific challenges faced:
¥ Speed of VOA processes. Whilst not as marginal as the lone operator,
cash-flow is still an issue. Whilst they primarily operate on a no-win no-fee
basis, in some instances they may charge up-front fees, which can help to
mitigate this issue.
¥ Predatory agents. As with the lone operator there is little they can do to fend
off their approaches to their clients. They must rely on building a strong
relationship with their clients.
MID-SIZE PRACTICES:
Employing in excess of 50 staff, a mid-sized practice will have more distinct pro
cesses and procedures than their smaller counterparts. They are likely operating
on a national level, with more than one office location. As a consequence, whilst
they do still represent a significant number of SMEs, they also have a larger
portfolio of larger businesses. They may have a number of sectors they specialise
in and may even have surveyors able to handle more esoteric cases, such as
airfields or power stations. They will have their own databases of rental informa
tion and access to systems such as Analyse to be able to access detailed VOA
information.
They are less affected by the predatory agents, as they will have a national reputa
tion and a more sophisticated client base.
LARGE AGENTS:
Operating at the national level, large agents will employ more than 100 people and
will offer a broader portfolio of services than just ratings advice. They will still
represent SMEs, but their focus will be on the larger businesses and corporate
entities. There is some cross over in terms of their client base with that of the
integrated agents, although they aren't able to offer quite the same sophistication
of service. They will operate across the entire business spectrum, with teams of
specialists for each type of business sector. They will also operate a number of
offices around the country, ensuring that their teams retain local knowledge.
PROFESSIONAL AGENTS HAVE MANY COMMONALITIES, BUT ARE ALSO QUITE VARIED IN TERMS OF THE TYPE OF
BUSINESS THEY OPERATE. THEY CAN RANGE FROM LONE OPERATORS, THROUGH TO SMALL PRIVATE PRACTICES AND
UP TO LARGE FIRMS OFFERING A BROAD RANGE OF PROPERTY RELATED SERVICES.
OWING TO HOW THE VOA OPERATES, ALL AGENTS WILL INTERACT WITH THE AGENCY IN SIMILAR WAYS, BUT THE
RAMIFICATIONS DEPENDING ON THE AGENT'S TYPE OF BUSINESS.
EXTERNAL
USER NEED
TAX PAYER
HOUSING
ASSOC.
COUNCIL TAX
PROPERTY
DEVELOPERS
ESTATE
SME SINGLE
MULTIPLE
LARGE
AGENT NDR
RATE PAYERS
MANAGERS
LANDLORDS
TENANTS
HOUSING ALLOWANCE
NON-DOMESTIC RATES
SEMI-PRO
Applying for a review or appeal
should be simple
The VOA to engage with us to resolve
the case one way or another
Access to VOA staff who are
empowered to make decisions
The VOA to respond quickly and not
be delayed by people being out of the
office.
To be able to agree cases faster
To agree decreases and negotiation
before getting to the VT
In times of high stress deal with
customers appropriately
To reach a resolution before
preparation of a statement of case is
necessary
NDR: more personal contact so that
issues can be resolved quickly.
Perhaps people dedicated to the area
CT: we would like more local offices
A quick service. "Why must it take a
couple of months".
A named contact or two for an area.
For new builds get CT set up quickly
so customers can access local
services
Consistency - to know the work is
carried out in the same office
Access to knowledgeable staff
The VOA to be more open like they
used to be
Ability to interact with the VOA in any
channel
The VOA to be independent and
allowed to be independent
The VOA need to compromise and
take on board valid evidence.
The VOA should require signed
authority to represent a client
A quick outcome
Understand the reasons for a
decision. Where appropriate to a
sufficient level of detail.
Would like an agent database of info
shared with the VOA. Would avoid
calls.
Understand the reason for being a
specific band.
Understand which valuation criteria
has had a direct impact on a
valuation
Know what the likely rates will be on
a property I am considering taking a
lease on.
Clear explanations of the calculation
to give transparency on calculating
rent
An indication of time scales
Better access to the VOA's rental
information
Know where an application is in the
process
The VOA should provide the evidence
used to inform a valuation when an
appeal is lodged.
To see all rental data published at
the time of publication
Access to valuation information to a
high level of detail
Know what the other deadlines are
for the Reval 2017 process
Alerts to significant changes in the
list
Understand how a valuation is
arrived at.
To see RV stats and trends
Intuitive online Q&A
More help in understanding how the
process works and what is involved -
particularly for smaller businesses
Save my details so I don't have to
enter them every time I make an
application
Remove property from the ratings
list as it is uninhabitable.
Explain each step of the process
Ability to provide supporting
information online
View and suggest corrections to the
details held relating to a property
Understand how the current and
historic rateable values of my a
property affects the current RV
Online applications
Check the details listed in my
summary valuation
To be able to get CT estimates online
Find a client's rateable value
Get properties merged into one
rateable value / single property split
into different RVs
Update details when a summary
valuation is wrong.
Compare a rateable value to other
properties
Understand why the VOA cannot
provide me with certain information
e.g. due to legislation
Provide information on what makes
successful and unsuccessful appeals
possibly case studies
Understand the VOA's purpose
Understand if I have a case for
review
Understand how to appeal
Understand the channels to file an
appeal quickly and efficiently
Simplicity of information
Understand why the VOA is asking
for certain data
Understand about small business
rate relief or rate exemptions
Understand the effect on my
business rates if I sub let part of my
property
Understand about unprofessional
agents and how to appoint a
reputable agent
Explain the process - help
customers to know what is expected
and when
Provide worked examples to show
how to appeal and how it all works
Understand how to get a rebate on
my business rates
Clear and accurate timelines of
appeal settlement
Details on appeals in a specific area
and the number of outstanding
appeals
Understand the chances of
successfully appealing
Know what the deadline is for
correcting a valuation
Have access to information and FAQs
by sector
See an estimated bill
Understand about NDR scams - what
to look out for and how to avoid them
Information that relates to my
situation and location
Understand how to disenstruct an
agent representing me
Report fraudulent messages
supposedly sent from the VOA
Explain more in your so customers
don't have to call or get into a panic
Greater disclosure
Timely responses to emails
A single point of contact
Face to face negotiation with the VOA
Responses in writing - in addition to
voice or face to face
Use plan English in all
communication
Don't want call backs but instant
answers.
Acknowledgement of submissions
or any communication received
Use non-threatening language in
letters and other communication
To be proactively contacted by the
VOA about the progress of an appeal
To be notified when a case worker is
on leave as progress on cases stop
The VOA to be more accessible
Being kept informed of progress at
all stages
Direct contact with case workers
Feedback on appeals
Understand whether a message I
have received from the VOA is
legitimate Reval 2017 messages
The switch board to be able to put
customers through to who they want
to talk to.
A better transition from LA to VOA
require more information and
guidance.
INFORMATION
SHOULD BE EASY TO
UNDERSTAND
COMMUNICATE
WITH ME
EXPLAIN WHY
KEEP ME INFORMED
DEALING WITH THE
VOA SHOULD BE
STRAIGHTFORWARD
Customer experience principles are the synthesis of all of the
research undertaken and reviewed in scope of this project. These
principles are a guide, a check point, to achieving a customer
experience that better meets the needs of the customer but also
the VOA. They should be used at each stage of all projects to
ensure whatever the VOA are doing will best meet the need of its
customers and its people.
Customer experience principles should evolve and develop and we
would encourage the VOA to own and develop these.
Enable all customers to have a seamless interaction with the VOA, by
providing processes, systems and communication routes that are
clear, well explained, easy to find and that meet their needs. Reduce
complexity and where this is unavoidable, ensure that customers are
provided with appropriate help and guidance.
ALLOW ME TO DO
MORE ONLINE
Provide customers with an integrated set of online tools that allow
them to conduct as much of their interaction with the VOA as they wish.
Ensure that tools accurately reflect the needs of their target audience
group and that they align with associated offline processes. Clearly
promote online tools on the VOA website and provide suitable links in
any digital communications sent to customers.
Avoid information black holes and ensure that is it easy for customers
to understand the state of any enquiry, appeal or ongoing
communication with the VOA. Provide proactive updates where
possible to reduce the need for customers to contact the VOA. Make
use of online channels to allow customers to easily enquire about the
status of their case.
Ensure that customers are able to easily understand any VOA
information or communications. Refrain from the use of jargon and
explain any complicated terminology. Address customers in an
appropriate tone to ensure that they are not threatened by or
dismissive of VOA communications. Help customers to navigate VOA
processes by providing easy to find explanations and clear directions to
the relevant online services.
ALWAYS EXPLAIN
Customers should always know why the VOA have made a decision,
why they have given a particular band, why they have done what that
have. Their reasoning should be understandable for all, especially lay
customers. The VOA should be transparent in all that they do. Online
they should embrace progressive disclosure to empower customers to
reveal more detail whilst avoiding overwhelming the user interface.
PROACTIVE
The VOA should always acknowledge receipt and provide a timely
response. There should be consistent points of contact, that can be
reached directly rather than through the contact centre. Should a point
of contact change the VOA should ensure that the customer is
proactively informed.

===== SOURCE: Professional-agent/VOA agent questionnaire 001 GERALDEVE - REDACTED.docx =====
VOA Agent questionnaire
[REDACTED NAME]
[REDACTED NAME] - [REDACTED NAME] - central London. Ex VOA - 3 years. 21yrs
[REDACTED NAME] - [REDACTED NAME] - pubs, bars, clubs. SE and London
[REDACTED NAME] - Offices and serviced offices
[REDACTED NAME] - Head of business rates - do no case work - [REDACTED ADDRESS]
[REDACTED NAME] - Retail and [REDACTED NAME] - work across the UK.
[REDACTED NAME] - retail and restaurants - London and east Anglia.
• Company? How many people work in your organisation? What is your location (or locations for larger agents)?
[REDACTED ORGANISATION]00 - Business rates and planning and development. Broad based professional consultancy practice. Building surveying.
Local knowledge issues - Huddersfield sis a London office. They have got to know London reasonable well, Some have been told not to accept properties . This is unprofessional.
Inspecting a property is fundamental. VOA won’t always do it,
Defence of the list - is their strapline.
VOA is KPI’ed on RV loss. 3.6%. Only measured on loss on appeals.
The VOA do defend the indefensible. There is defending RV and a complete lack of common sense
It’s the business / SME that is suffering not agents or the VOA.
SMEs it is a denial of an access to justice.
We used t get on extremely well with individuals.
VOA have told us if the VT make the decisions it is not their fault.
Culture of fear in rife. People are scared of the line manager.
• What is your role?
• What does a typical day look like for you? What are the key tasks or activities you typically undertake?
• What type of people outside the VOA do you tend to interact with? How many? When? Why?
• What types of case do you deal with? How many? What size? In what sector? % split?
• Do you cover different types of cases? [PROBE ABOUT APPEALS, MAINTENANCE CASES, CT AND/OR NDR]
• Who would you say your main clients are [PROBE IF INDIVIDUALS, OR BUSINESSES AND WHETHER LARGE OR SME BUSINESSES]
• How do you win new business? How do you make first contact with customers?
CUSTOMER PROFILE
• (Profile) Describe your customers to me?
• (Triggers) Why are they doing what they are doing? What is the motivation?
• What is their goal?
• What is your goal?
• What interactions do you have with the VOA? What interactions have you had prior to communicating with them? How do they find the experience?
• How do you feel about how things currently work? Capture both frustrations, but also things that currently work well
• What are you looking to get out of your interaction with the VOA?
JOURNEYS
• How do you tend to communicate with the VOA?
• How do you tend to communicate with your clients? How do you advise of a final outcome?
• What sorts of information do customers provide you with? What information do you provide to them?
• Who else are they interacting with? Why?
• How long does your relationship with your clients last on average? [PROBE IF THERE ARE ANY DIFFERENCES BETWEEN LARGE/ SMALL BUSINESSES OR INDIVIDUALS]
• What is your understanding of the VOA’s processes for valuing property?
APPEALS
• What governs when you, or your client, decide to make an appeal?
• Do you collect any information to support or inform the appeal? What would this be and when would you do this?
• What are your thoughts about how the appeals process works? Capture frustrations and areas for improvement
• How much contact do you have with the VOA during the appeals process?
• What is involved in preparing a Statement of Case?
• What research do you carry out?
• Are there any particular tools or systems that you use when preparing appeals?
• What are your thoughts about the current tools provided by the VOA?
FINALLY
• 1a. What would you say were the best things about your experiences with VOA - what are the things we do well? [PROMPT FOR 3-5 DIFFERENT EXPERIENCES/COMMENTS]
The retired people
Certain individuals - but there aren’t than many.
• 1b. What would you say were the worst things about your experiences with VOA - what needs improving the most from your perspective? [PROMPT FOR 3-5 DIFFERENT EXPERIENCES/COMMENTS]
• If we could change one thing about the VOA what would that be?
Individual accountability
Transparency
Culture
Can only send in attachments of 1mb to VOA - that is just the lease.
• Would it be ok to contact you again on further research?
[REDACTED NAME] - come through Jerry.

===== SOURCE: Professional-agent/VOA agent questionnaire 001 HASLAMS - REDACTED.docx =====
VOA Agent questionnaire
[REDACTED NAME]
• Company? How many people work in your organisation? What is your location (or locations for larger agents)?
[REDACTED ORGANISATION]. 22 people.
• What is your role?
Deal with a range oif things - business rates appeals. Had some conatct on capital gains. When someone has sold a building and we have acted on their behalf. Only on a handful of occasions
• What does a typical day look like for you? What are the key tasks or activities you typically undertake?
Landlord and tenant work - 70%. Business rates is 25% of what I do. Agentcy work - acquisions for clients 5%.
• What type of people outside the VOA do you tend to interact with? How many? When? Why?
Insitutional landloards - pension funds (Major client area) 60%. 40% private companies. Few private infdividuals, Ocupiers is a range. [REDACTED NAME]. Reading football club. Golf clubs, private schools. Bulk is offices and retail space.
Most businesses ask us to look at it. We tell a client if it is worth whil if it isn’t we tell them not to bother. I think most agents do this.
CVS call us and act to us. Their people in the call cntre get £10 for every posivitive response.
[REDACTED NAME] - when the VOA send out the form of return. When the rates bill comes around.
• What types of case do you deal with? How many? What size? In what sector? % split?
Rate appeals.
Rent reviews.
130 on the go at the moment.
Size varies - smallest 1k sq ft to 120k sq ft.
The small cases arenb’t profitable.
We get a lot of repeat business.
• Do you cover different types of cases? [PROBE ABOUT APPEALS, MAINTENANCE CASES, CT AND/OR NDR]
Fewer cases go to appeal. As things are getting more accurate. The VOA are being more accurate than it used to - as they are collected more and more information.
• Who would you say your main clients are [PROBE IF INDIVIDUALS, OR BUSINESSES AND WHETHER LARGE OR SME BUSINESSES]
• How do you win new business? How do you make first contact with customers?
Repeat business
Comes through the door
Spotting opportunities
If we are [REDACTED ADDRESS] we ask the others
Some people with rates can ge ritesent. Took a lot of convincing. Mistrust. Damage caused by cowboy agents.
CUSTOMER PROFILE
• (Profile) Describe your customers to me?
• (Triggers) Why are they doing what they are doing? What is the motivation?
• What is their goal?
Reductions in rates
Rent review - landlords - is about getting the right results - not the right rent. Or an extra break clause.
• What is your goal?
Do a good service and the rest of the business takes care of itself. It is about getting the right result. Repeat business and further fees
• What interactions do you have with the VOA? What interactions have you had prior to communicating with them? How do they find the experience?
[REDACTED NAME] - program for discussion. The interaction is not as indepth as it used to be. There have been a lot of changes and a lot of the iold team have gone. I used to be able to pick up the phone and have a discussion.
It has made my job harder. It is getting more difficult to negotiate a reduction - as we can’t pick up the phone and have a sensible discussions. We feel the VOA are not as flexible as they used to be.
Feels like computer says no and that’s it.
We put evidence and arguments across that in the commercial world it would be taken onboard but it is ignored. We think this is due to VOA staff not have commercial experience.
Many case workers / referencers don’t have the experience or local knowledge.
BLADE. We sometimes have to escalate to get a result. But it can take a long time. There is no process to do this so it is down to me to push for it. It was harder than it should have been to get it escalated. We had a lot of evidence. The VOA responses are non-committal. It is frustrating for us. We feel there is a reticence to compromise.
Sometimes the margin is too small and the effort to go to appeal means it isn’t financially worth it for the client. VOA’s process makes it hard for these businesses and often these are the smaller business.
We work on ‘no win no fee’. Professional agents work this way. Cowboys don’t. Because we have to put so much information together these days it is hard to make profit.
Often agree before we go to appeal - the 8 week.
Clients response to an extra fee to get to appeal is mixed.
What could the VOA do to make that better - the lack of evidence at the early stage the VOA is relying on. The evidence the VOA use to arrive at their figures.
Not sure I would agree that the VOA are fair. They stick to their guns when the evidence is compelling. The are inflexibility. Younger people seem to have more of an ability to compromise. The safest thing is not to make a decision.
• How do you feel about how things currently work? Capture both frustrations, but also things that currently work well
Poor evidence from the VOA. We get it all once we receive their SoC. They may have evidence that I was not aware of and they could change the path of the appeal. Maybe not appeal.
If they see themselves as far why not give us that information earlier.
Don’t believe either side is trying to pull the wall over anyones eyes.
Works well?
- Program for discussion. It’s a good window of opportunity. We solve lots of cases. This happened prior to the SoC, after the appeal is submitted.
• What are you looking to get out of your interaction with the VOA?
Information. The right result for the client. Deal with pleasant people - most are good but a few could be nicer.
JOURNEYS
• How do you tend to communicate with the VOA?
Phone is preferred. Best way to get an answer. Better way yo negotiate. Get a feeling if they know what they are talking about.
Email as a back up. If I can’t get through to someone on the phone.
The call system is frustrating. It is cumbersome. If there was at least the email address for the case worker I would get in touch with them straight away.
We get pointless calls backs, saying I can’t help you and I will get the person to call you. But it is nice to get the call back.
Call back time is ok.
I generally know where the cases - due top my experience and knowing the process.
• How do you tend to communicate with your clients? How do you advise of a final outcome?
Phone or email. Do what the client prefers. I like to make phone contact.
• What sorts of information do customers provide you with? What information do you provide to them?
You never get the full information. We ask for A copy of the rates bill, go out and measure.
I don’t give them the evidence. It I advise it is not worth taking it forward I will give them the evidence as to why. Most don’t want detailed information.
• Who else are they interacting with? Why?
Retails talk to each other (local ones).
Other surveyors
Kick off the discussions with the VOA themselves
• How long does your relationship with your clients last on average? [PROBE IF THERE ARE ANY DIFFERENCES BETWEEN LARGE/ SMALL BUSINESSES OR INDIVIDUALS]
Some are very long - years.
Large businesses use agent representation nearly all of the time.
We prefer surveyor over agent.
• What is your understanding of the VOA’s processes for valuing property?
I don’t know it that well. How they arrive at their view isn’t clear.
APPEALS
• What governs when you, or your client, decide to make an appeal?
We advise if it is commercially worthwhile to take forward. Clients want to know how much we can save them up front. We turn down work that isn’t profitable.
• Do you collect any information to support or inform the appeal? What would this be and when would you do this?
• What are your thoughts about how the appeals process works? Capture frustrations and areas for improvement
Main bone is the SoC (evidence ) coming over so late.
Some VOAs won’t discuss things after that date. Even if they are late with their evidence. Means it dgoes to an appeal. Many will but some don’t
• How much contact do you have with the VOA during the appeals process?
Ok. Sufficient. It varies from appeal to appeal.
• What is involved in preparing a Statement of Case?
Getting the rental evidence together. AVD 2008 - getting the eivience for that. Sometime you have to go back 7 years to get evidence. It can be difficult to get this evidence and if takes a lot of time to get it. Rent free periods - takes a lot of time to get.
I get evidence - we have jinour surveyors who do the investigation work. Easier for me to get the info as I have the expeirne and the contacts.
A lot of it is about personal contacts.
Preparation of a SoC is easy and quick. It is getting the Evidence.
• What research do you carry out?
See above
• Are there any particular tools or systems that you use when preparing appeals?
[REDACTED NAME] - our own and some we buy. CoStar EGI. They are notoriously inaccurate and lacking in detail, so you still need to make contact with the agent to find out if it is correct.
Typically it would take 3 to 4 weeks to prepare a SoC. E will have done a lot of work up to this point. And more when it goes to tribunal. University of Aberystwyth many buildings, different typoes, sectors - takes ages.
• What are your thoughts about the current tools provided by the VOA?
[REDACTED NAME] - we read through them. We can see how the VOA have arrived at their appeal. I do look at the website in reasonable detail. There is a reasponable amount of information.
We would like a little more detaik on how they arrived at their deicison - what irt is based on. They give it to you if you ask, but it is [REDACTED ADDRESS] it would save effort and time.
FINALLY
• 1a. What would you say were the best things about your experiences with VOA - what are the things we do well? [PROMPT FOR 3-5 DIFFERENT EXPERIENCES/COMMENTS]
They do a reasonable job. In the old days the good sensible discussions were good.
Some staff are good, some aren’t. The more experienced ones are good and we have constructive discussions. The less experience are nice to talk to but not as forth coming.
• 1b. What would you say were the worst things about your experiences with VOA - what needs improving the most from your perspective? [PROMPT FOR 3-5 DIFFERENT EXPERIENCES/COMMENTS]
Inability to compromise or take on board valid evidence.
Agree things faster. We wonder if they hope you’ll give up and go away if it takes too long.
Getting the evidence earlier (SoC)
Don’t get useful feedback. They don’t come back to you.
The rating system needs rethinking. But that’s not the VOA.
• If we could change one thing about the VOA what would that be?
Getting the SoC early - more open from day one.
• Would it be ok to contact you again on further research?
CVS get a cold shoulder from surveyors - we all network - they have stolen our clients by promising the earth. Expect there will be a lot of appeals. Customers deal with a call centre operator and has no experience to fall back on.

===== SOURCE: Professional-agent/VOA agent questionnaire 001 JLL - REDACTED.docx =====
VOA Agent questionnaire
[REDACTED NAME]
• Company? How many people work in your organisation? What is your location (or locations for larger agents)?
[REDACTED ORGANISATION]. 2nd largest real estate advisor in the world. We are the largest in the uk. Rating team - approximately 30 members of staff. We specialise in large assessments in the ratings list. [REDACTED NAME] - national grid + Microsoft + cisco + 60% of the ports. We only do top end of the market ion retail. CVS are chasing out all the money in the bottom end of the market.
We are international.
VOA seem to judge everything by who is most active by the most appeals submitted. We have more rateable value but less appeals.
We consider appeals very carefully. We recently we had the 3rd April deadline for servicing appeals. We didn’t hammer that date.
Sometimes the VOA get the assessments too low, we don’t bother appealing those.
Ex VOA - worked there for 12 years.
• What is your role?
National director in the rating team - west London and thames valley.
Win work - because we are international we have reach across the world. And a successful team. Most are through open competition.
CPRE are the largest.
Focus on restate advice.
• What does a typical day look like for you? What are the key tasks or activities you typically undertake?
Preparing a SoC for a VT in July. Then an inspection for a client. Mix of advising clients on the effect of their liability and dealing with the VOA.
• What type of people outside the VOA do you tend to interact with? How many? When? Why?
Referencer to a band 1 (group valuation officer). We deal with senior people on the more specialist properties. It makes a big difference having these people involved - they understand property and valuation law. Most staff don’t know this. It is the biggest issue.
We have lost the old way of doing things. Going to VT is a failure of two professional people - it should be agreeable.
Last year I went 6 times. Before that in 8 years I went once. This is due to the people we are dealing with to make a decision.
If there is anything over 5% they won’t sign it off without going to tribunal. Even if the VOA agree. Need to ask the VOA. Is it protection in rateable value? If the VT makes the decision they can blame.
The fair methodology used to be the case - those days are gone.
Left the VOA - disillusion with the VOA was going. To get a promotion you had to be a manger or team leader. They are willing to let Charter surveyors go and use junior staff to do it.
It now very hard to get hold of a case worker. Very hard to get a reply. Case workers seem to hide from you. There are some really good ones who have been their for a good while (experienced). Many see to wait to see the SoC.
CVS are good rating surveyors - the problem with CVS is they have a marketing team who push appeals. CVS don’t visit appeals.
• What types of case do you deal with? How many? What size? In what sector? % split?
Rating appeals. We employ specialists. Sector split - office based clients then industrials, then utilities. In terms of rateable value utilities will come up higher. These sort of cases don’t go to appeal as they are negotiated in advanced.
VOA people are depressed and down. They are all very down trodden. We used to just get the job done and people would like to go back. There is now a believe that do not trust agents or get too close to them. Treat the rating list as if it is there own money.
The VOA are defensive - defend the seeming indispensible.
The appellant has to prove their case. We won’t look at it and advise.
• Do you cover different types of cases? [PROBE ABOUT APPEALS, MAINTENANCE CASES, CT AND/OR NDR]
• Who would you say your main clients are [PROBE IF INDIVIDUALS, OR BUSINESSES AND WHETHER LARGE OR SME BUSINESSES]
• How do you win new business? How do you make first contact with customers?
CUSTOMER PROFILE
• (Profile) Describe your customers to me?
• (Triggers) Why are they doing what they are doing? What is the motivation?
Main reason physical work on the property or locality or splits and mergers.
When we go to appeal won 5 and lost 1 - the 1 was a long shot. Our clients wanted us to do it. We only go it we have a good case.
There is no logic how the VT prioritise the work. Have one 400k and has been delayed 3 times. 6 to 8 weeks. Some have not been relisted for two year. This is difficult to explain to clients.
• What is their goal?
• What is your goal?
• What interactions do you have with the VOA? What interactions have you had prior to communicating with them? How do they find the experience?
[REDACTED NAME] - we get a letter telling us who the case worker is. If I know them I will call them to make contact. If it is someone I don’t know I drop an email to the VOA. Try to provide comparable in the target period.
We don’t get much information early on. Times have changed - we used to provide information but now the VOA thinks it is against confidentiality. Case workers struggle their cases - they are too busy.
• How do you feel about how things currently work? Capture both frustrations, but also things that currently work well
Agents and the VOA need to get together to re-establish trust between two professional bodies.
The VOA need to raise its professional standard to value property rather than clear a case.
• What are you looking to get out of your interaction with the VOA?
There was a time when you were trying to build a rapport. I want to enjoy working with people. I don’t want conflicts all the time. Want to negotiate.
It costs a lot on money to go to tribunal.
JOURNEYS
• How do you tend to communicate with the VOA?
• How do you tend to communicate with your clients? How do you advise of a final outcome?
• What sorts of information do customers provide you with? What information do you provide to them?
Where required I have a copy of the lease summary. Corporates keep very little information their real estate. We will then inspect the property. We look at the rating list for comparable evidence.
• Who else are they interacting with? Why?
• How long does your relationship with your clients last on average? [PROBE IF THERE ARE ANY DIFFERENCES BETWEEN LARGE/ SMALL BUSINESSES OR INDIVIDUALS]
• What is your understanding of the VOA’s processes for valuing property?
APPEALS
• What governs when you, or your client, decide to make an appeal?
• Do you collect any information to support or inform the appeal? What would this be and when would you do this?
• What are your thoughts about how the appeals process works? Capture frustrations and areas for improvement
• How much contact do you have with the VOA during the appeals process?
• What is involved in preparing a Statement of Case?
Has to be submitted by rating agent or appellant 6 weeks before the tribunal. It is our case before the rating hearing. If it is not in the SoC I cannot bring it up.
VOA SoC are mass produced with little thought. I don’t bother reading them. They give you a lot of case law and don’t respond to the issues you have identified. You get the impression the person who wrote it does understand.
When you go to tribunal you really should know what both sides are thinking. We should be able to say we have agreed this and this but we don’t agree on this point. The way it is now we don’t know what the other person is thinking we have to prepare a lot. Tribunals could be quicker.
We work on a mixture if fee basis - big portfolios - they are on a fixed annual fee - they want to talk to us for advice at any time. Most corporates want no win no fee - keeps us focused. As an expert witness I can’t stand up as a no win no fee basis.
Cost to go to VT is around £100k. VOA don’t look at the cost to VT. [REDACTED NAME] - if you have a company that occupiers first and 3 floor it should have one rate.
• What research do you carry out?
• Are there any particular tools or systems that you use when preparing appeals?
• What are your thoughts about the current tools provided by the VOA?
FINALLY
• 1a. What would you say were the best things about your experiences with VOA - what are the things we do well? [PROMPT FOR 3-5 DIFFERENT EXPERIENCES/COMMENTS]
Nothing . Difficult for me - I like the VOA, it gave me a good start and training. I don’t get a good experience anymore. One example - we exchanged cases at the same figure, we have had three tribunals and the good case worker sorted it in a day.
The VOA cannot be expected to get the assessment correct for all 1.8 million properties.
A VOA guy called me and wanted to talk and do it like the old days. When you deal with someone you have had a conversation with and it is constructive.
• 1b. What would you say were the worst things about your experiences with VOA - what needs improving the most from your perspective? [PROMPT FOR 3-5 DIFFERENT EXPERIENCES/COMMENTS]
Appeals where you have no feedback, no response to emails. No response until you get to tribunal.
• If we could change one thing about the VOA what would that be?
Be more accessible and communicate more. Be more open again.
My companies DB is better than the VOAs.
• Would it be ok to contact you again on further research?

===== SOURCE: Professional-agent/VOA agent questionnaire 001 VAIL WILLIAMS - REDACTED.docx =====
VOA Agent questionnaire
[REDACTED NAME]
[REDACTED NAME] - ex VOA 13 years. Left in 89. Lots of people left the VOA at the time. I started a new form called [REDACTED NAME]. In [REDACTED ADDRESS] to go to - it had a good name. The VOA has losts its ID. It is down to people, whi is in charge, its people. The keep on moving around the offices.
[REDACTED NAME] - [REDACTED NAME] - responsibility for clients and client recruitment. Rating appeals.
• Company? How many people work in your organisation? What is your location (or locations for larger agents)?
[REDACTED ORGANISATION]. Ratings = 8 Total = 140 staff. 132 are covering - agency, building consultancy, property and assessments, investment, valutations, development and planning and LPA receivership work.
• What is your role?
CVS ride on the back of our work - once we get a win they exploit it in the area. They spot it and hammer the market with their sales force. They have ascot race course as a client. Most people I know who have had a CVS experiences say they will never go back there again.
We do client surveys at the end of the case to gauge satisfaction.
CVS are smash and grab. They give the entire profession a bad name.
[REDACTED NAME] - partner in the ratings department. Responsible for winning the work. Can be new customers or existing customers b u working with us in different areas.
We’re all about advising clients in terms of their rates - paying the right amount, not paying for old buildings / sites, taking on new building and getting buildings assessed at the right time. Advise on their level of their rateable value.
Work for Oracle.
Trusted advisor. We give the client best advice. Our clients learn to expect it but they are also a sophisticated clients that know what we should provide.
• What does a typical day look like for you? What are the key tasks or activities you typically undertake?
Winning new business. Meeting with potential clients. Seeing existing clients. Dealing with appeals. I manage but do the more high value or work on clients I am closest to.
We’re very busy.
Think the VOA job has become increasing difficult. I’m aware of staffing numbers. I have dealt with Reading VOA and all the senior staff have gone - retired or left. There is nobody in reading where you can have a sensible chat about an appeal in the areas.
It means a great deal of frustration in not being ale to progress appeals. In the past: when appeals are put in and programmed we would get a lot of their information. This would be before any discussions started. But now the VOA say it is a data protection issue - but we disagree it is legal. The onus was put on us to look into it and the research. If the info we found the VOA had was incorrect we would send it back so they can update. We would then be left with solid evidence to make a constructive discussion. I
[REDACTED NAME] - we don’t know who the case worker is. If we do manage to find out the case worker can change. There is not communication to find that. We are passed around internally. During the discussion period we often find we have got part of the way with one person and they are pulled off to another team and they don’t know who their cases have been passed over to. We have to start again with someone new.
Most of the appeals I deal with now there isn’t a proper discussion about the appeal at any stage.
Our clients get very frustrated.
It is very difficult to manage our workloads.
I think we should go back to a system where the VOA provides its information at the start of the process. It should only be appeals that have exhausted negotiations that go to the VT system. The VT system is overloaded.
The VT overload makes live very stressful. During the current list I have questioned the job I do. I have to work all night. We don’t know until the last minute if we are on at the VT. We are told two days before hand. Do we prepare when we don’t need it? Or work night and day for two days. The system is unreasonable.
Anything we fail to produce is negligent. The VOA cases are slap dash - poorly put together.
It is very hard to explain to the client why the VT date won’t happen.
The VT system isnlt great. The panel are not property specialists. They can be swayed by the [REDACTED NAME]. Seems strange the panel are not specialists.
A lot of wrong decisions are made because the panel doesn’t understand the evidence.
Get one chairman (normally a professional) a clerk, Some people on the panel are just there for a good day out.
We have to explain our points in the most simplistic of terms.
If the decision goes the wrong way: we had a building in Newbury with [REDACTED NAME] - building was not occupyable. The VOA didn’t like that and they think about the implications of that decision. They went to the lands tribunal. Vodafone met with the LA and chances of success were high the costs involved were £100k, with 3 months of building work it wasn’t worth it. The VOA use public money to fund this. If a business the size of Vodafone can’t do it what chance to smaller businesses have.
The VOA have appealed some three time and lost out. Now they [REDACTED ADDRESS] all at tax payers money. It comes back to RV leakage. VOA used to be an independent organisation, increasing over the years and in this list the VOA cannot agree a reduction more than 5% and they have to justify every single reduction.
VIOA say no because of there RV leakage.
Once again - Computer says no.
FOR - A client had just gone past the date. We could normally sort this. But the client had already got a penalty. It would be useful if the VOA are a little more pragmatic about this sort of stuff.
Yesterday I met a LA - their attitude was now can we help this rate payer - what can we do. Our client thinks that LA 9Witchaven are fantastic. The VOA are no longer wanting to cooperate.
Young people seem less likely to neogicate. A lot of the younger ones turn up to meeting not looking very professional (we always used to). THye are not very skilled and they don’t know what they are turning about.
VOA are far more process driven now. We would look at things sendiblity in my day. Process and box ticking.
Admin side of things - creation of files, data systems. IT side of it. Use anaylise. Caseload and calls to the VOA.
• What type of people outside the VOA do you tend to interact with? How many? When? Why?
People don’t to talk so a lot of it is a on email. Call centre cant put you through. We waste so much time.
At VT the case handler gets taken off the case and you have to start again. They seem to move around casework. Really frustyrating.
I’m always trying to move thinsg forward - it is a big part of my day.
VOA are under resourced. We no longer deal with London surveyor - they can be all around the country. They have no local knowledge so they can’t agree something. I know the wes end I’ve been dealing with it for 30 years - the VOA had that but it has gone. The patch valuer went years ago. The rest have left. Cost cutting?
There are a lot of young people who donlt have the experience.
The loss of local knowledge is massive. VOA always tlak aboiut how they will gte it passed their management.
The young guys are already having to refer to someone else.
We can and [REDACTED ADDRESS].
Fair? Some in the VOA who take delight hiding behind the regulation. I donlt think they are fair.
• What types of case do you deal with? How many? What size? In what sector? % split?
Office space in West London. Also airfields, ship yards. Do bulk class stuff and waste transfer station.
Diffenrent cases are dealt with by the specialist unit. One particular guy makes things harder than it should be. He puts cases up that come back down then. People cherry pick thebinformation they want to come out - this happens quite a lot. The specialist guys are more professional and experience. You can have a good discussion with them.
VT - deal with them a lot more. SoC, came in in 2010. Bringing t=in the statement of case has made everyone life more difficult - everyone is runningbetween 1 case and another. We are all running around trying to fulfil the obligation to the tribunal. Before we would have met and got it settled.
The not speaking puts lots of pressure on everyone.
There are months before the VT and have to get something settled.
I don’t go to VT often. Agreement can happen at anytime - if easy case then it is early on.
• Do you cover different types of cases? [PROBE ABOUT APPEALS, MAINTENANCE CASES, CT AND/OR NDR]
• Who would you say your main clients are [PROBE IF INDIVIDUALS, OR BUSINESSES AND WHETHER LARGE OR SME BUSINESSES]
• How do you win new business? How do you make first contact with customers?
We do a one off fee. Not like CVS. We look at it this is the saving you will get over the rating list. I will adjust the fee if it is greater than what they will get back.
[REDACTED NAME] - I will always try and avoid it. We are up front on charging.
If we get to see the VOA valuation officer. We normally get a result when we speak to someone at a high level. The case will be listed and there will be a target date.
[REDACTED ADDRESS] - we only go if we feel very strongly. The VOA’s preparation - if they haven’t been to the property 9 times out of 10 they won’t know it.
Staff are suffering with stress, having breakdowns.
75% of the time they have not inspected. This can put them at a disadvantage.
Always worth meeting the VOA on site if we can.
Reading doesn’t have any valuers. Lost them to CVS.
VOA should have more trust in the people that go to the property.
The VOA is getting out of touch of what is happening in the market - because they are doing so much from the desk. The VOA doesn’t value local knowledge.
VOA has a lot of young people now - lost a lot of the older experienced ones. Old ones are holding out for the pension.
Buildings we are working in - we look through the list to see what hasn’t been appealed an get in contact to try and get a meeting. Word of mouth, recommendation. A little tendering - isn’t that profitable.
CVS misled on the reductions and the reductions they have got. They have a called us here saying we haven’t appealed. They see a VOA noticed that we have not appealed. We know it is right and CVS say it is wrong. They hound people to sign up with them. Their contracts are complex and penaltys of deinstructing them are severe. They charge a fee if someone gets a reduction with another company later on.
At CVS it is all targets. Pressure is intense. [REDACTED ADDRESS] to work. They have employed a few exVOAs. Although the ones who wouldn’t get employed by provate practice. CVS don’t worry about them getting new business in. Cleints call us and say they are obnoxious.
CUSTOMER PROFILE
• (Profile) Describe your customers to me?
Individual business, sole traders to international organisations. 10 properties or more are our ideal client base.
The bigger the RV the % comes down.
I get a lot of recommendations through solicitors, bankers etc.
It is not to do with home big your rateable value is we will help them.
Ratings areas - saving money and making money. Work across sector. Most of it is occupiers. Office space in London. Corporates who have portfolios - other offices elsewhere in the UK. Most of vail Williams work I son offices (in London)
• (Triggers) Why are they doing what they are doing? What is the motivation?
Don’t understand the rating systems themselves. Many have a frustration with the system. Most question what their reward is for paying their rates. Don’t know council keep some on the money. Customers are frustrated by cuts. Reading LA want a cut on their rates.
From a rate payers point of view I think the worst thing the government have done is cancel the 2015 revaluation. It came from out of the blue. Customers have got used to the 5 year changes. It doesn’t give rate payers certainty. It would have lost votes in the election happening at the same time. It would have correction of business rates.
Any revaluation has to be rates neutral.
Business rates should be like corporation tax or income tax, the better you do the more you pay.
• What is their goal?
• What is your goal?
• What interactions do you have with the VOA? What interactions have you had prior to communicating with them? How do they find the experience?
I phone the VOA a lot. It is hard to get hold of them. I always use DD. Some VOA staff never answer their phones. No one else pick up. Sometimes it goes back to the call centre, sometimes you don’t. Some tier 1 can look at the diary others can’t / won’t. Sometime we need to talk to people with a VT date. But we can’t get hold of some of them. We have to keep trying to find a time they might pick up the phone.
[REDACTED ADDRESS] without speaking to the other side.
We use a lot of email. I always follow up on the email for an audit trail. I often have to use this to the VT. These show I have done my best to get a dialogue to the panel.
Often have face to face meetings. When I can get hold of them. Used to do a lot of it in years gone by. This is my preferred.
VOA staff often go off with stress.
Office closures mean VOA are losing specialists in the local areas. The VOA needs to be properly resourced. It needs to be independent and allowed to be independent.
Mainly caseworkers. Sometimes referencers.
• How do you feel about how things currently work? Capture both frustrations, but also things that currently work well
When you call the switch board many won’t give out a DD. Some I can persuade. It can take a long time to get through on occasions.
We should have a number for each [REDACTED NAME] we can call if we can’t get hold of anyone.
We get nowhere from making the phone call - 20m minutes lost.
Once you make your appeal you cannot give your client any idea on when if will be targeted. When we do get notification the chance of talking to a VOA person has slipped / hard to do.
We spend a lot of time trying to track people down.
I suffer increasing stress as I can’t get to talk to any body.
After the target date the appeal disappears into a blackhole. When it pops out it is all systems go. Until the VT date.
Reputable agents make sure they understand the purpose of the SoC and get all the right evidence in there. CVS just churn them out and they all look the same.
Things changes I 2010 due to a shake up of the VT system (SoC introduced) - to get ride of the rogue appeals form the likes of CVS. The VT are now flooded by 1000s of appeals. RV leakage
We would be mortified if a rate payers rates went up. CVS are like ‘oh well’.
VOA Valuation officer used to add note to the system when we corrected things. This has now stopped. I prove it to be incorrect but the VOA still use the old wrong data. Is it at time thing, staff? Frustrating. The attitude of the VIA has changed - they don’t want to agree any reductions.
• What are you looking to get out of your interaction with the VOA?
JOURNEYS
• How do you tend to communicate with the VOA?
Try to phone. I email once I have a name - because I can’t get hold of anyone. Some seem to work 10 and finish at 4. The business day is 9 to 6.
When people go on holiday the work stops. One has a month off. Our clients are not happy.
Client thoughts on the VOA - little experience of dealing with the VOA.
• How do you tend to communicate with your clients? How do you advise of a final outcome?
Phone and email. New bulletins.
Split between the one off and ongoing work. 90% one /two property type clients. Some are portfolio clients.
• What sorts of information do customers provide you with? What information do you provide to them?
• Who else are they interacting with? Why?
• How long does your relationship with your clients last on average? [PROBE IF THERE ARE ANY DIFFERENCES BETWEEN LARGE/ SMALL BUSINESSES OR INDIVIDUALS]
• What is your understanding of the VOA’s processes for valuing property?
APPEALS
• What governs when you, or your client, decide to make an appeal?
• Do you collect any information to support or inform the appeal? What would this be and when would you do this?
• What are your thoughts about how the appeals process works? Capture frustrations and areas for improvement
• How much contact do you have with the VOA during the appeals process?
• What is involved in preparing a Statement of Case?
We have a standard form / template. Fill in the basics facts on the property, background, the issues (floor, allowance etc). Any evidence you want to reply on you have to give the bones fo it - a summary - a section on what the VO has been arguing (if we can have those discussions), often the VOIA are arguing other settlements. Many of these have been withdrawls. Could be the rtable occupier has moved on. The valuers try to present this as evidence and it is not evidence at all. Case law p- precedence, court of appeal decisions. If it is not meant hear you don’t have the right to bring it in at a later stage. Different agents treat this differently. CVS use the same for each event, they use the SoC to keep the appeal live.
CVS outsource surveyors. Might be about 200 people.
• What research do you carry out?
• Are there any particular tools or systems that you use when preparing appeals?
• What are your thoughts about the current tools provided by the VOA?
FINALLY
• 1a. What would you say were the best things about your experiences with VOA - what are the things we do well? [PROMPT FOR 3-5 DIFFERENT EXPERIENCES/COMMENTS]
Very little.
Long pause - there are good individuals that are good. As an organisation - nothing. Really struggling. There has been an improvement since the chanellors autumn statement, but it still needs a lot of nagging.
Long pause - there is nothing. They donlt have the understanding onm the impact of transitional relief on clients buisnesses.
There used to be a lot more communication - verbal. I can’t remember the last time a VO rang me to instiagate a discussion. We donlt get a phone number - that really winds me up. So we ahev to go through the 501 number.
They donlt always respond to emails - so I gave to pone. They isnlt always bounce bck when people are holiday.
• 1b. What would you say were the worst things about your experiences with VOA - what needs improving the most from your perspective? [PROMPT FOR 3-5 DIFFERENT EXPERIENCES/COMMENTS]
VOA are making simple cases difficult - they put things in for appeal when it is clear cut. This can take years - for SMs this is bad news - it can hit cash flow.
I have no idea if someone will respond to an agreement form. Too much is forgotten about or lost. We have to keep checking the rating list so adds to our work load. We no longer had the knowledge and trust the VOA are completing their procedures.
Need to be more impartial.
Act indpendantly
Don;lt follow their charter.
[REDACTED NAME] - takes too long for our clients and our business. Cleints expect cases to be fixed in days and weeks. I’ve just closed one that started in 2005! We got the right answer [REDACTED ADDRESS]. This would have never happened in the 70/80s. Case law was the reason for the delay. The present had alrady been set. As soon as you mention nil of deletion the VOA barriers come up.
Valuers have tolerance of 5%.
This eats out of our margin. It is harder to make money with the number of delays.
Some clients close the business as the rates are too high and unfairly. We tell the VOA - but it gets stuck in the system. It takes too long. There is no ownership or responsibility.
Used to be big fish in small pionds - is the other way around now.
Should be looking to make appeals valid and not invalid.
Attidudw from the main switch board. Have to go through 501501 - they can’t put them me through to anyone. I may know someone but I can’t get through. Unless you have a VO reference with a case number then forget it. I would like ore accessibility.
Diffitult to arrange jin inspections.
Hours of working - hard to get hold of anyone after 4 oclock. We have very limited times for getting hold of people.
Section 44a - these are taking an eternity.
Caseworkers being reallocated latminute
Contact centre.
• If we could change one thing about the VOA what would that be?
Staffing properly and allow them to be independent.
Too many good VOA staff are throwing in the towel.
It needs to be more impartial and act as in independent body. We used to have a tenants charter. We had to obide by it. They do everything these days to keep the values as high a s they can. Guess it is diven by the government. They don’t put through all the eveidence but put through their favourable. Theuy should be inpartical and do the right thing but that don’t.
We need an indpendnant VOA.
In Westminster they won’t give in.
VOA are no longer fair. Many high people in the VOA want to leave. The people who hjave been around for a while know how to be fiar The younger ones arnet - feel they are answerable to too many people. They are afraid. I’ve heard it [REDACTED ADDRESS] than give a reduction.
Less reliance of valuation judgement. Valutaion is not black and white
Valuers need more responsibility but must be skilled.
A culture of fear. Problem at the top of the tree.
Everything is coming to a standstill and nothing is getting done. This is one of the major issues. The problem really is nothing is getting sorted out.
It is hard to run a business. In terms of cash flow.
I think the main problems are in London (VOA).
Abolish it. Bring back the local knowledge or the communication.
Do away with the SoC issue.
We donlt get enough information from them. They used to give more. Np they give you nothing. The information we get when they submit their SoC is too late in the process.
• Would it be ok to contact you again on further research?
[REDACTED NAME] - happy to be quoted.
